the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
hi I'm Sweeney davidís I'm a professor
of election engineering and computer
science I'm gonna be Co lecturing six
double-o six
introduction to algorithms this term
with Professor Erik Demaine
Erik say hi and we hope you're gonna
have a fun time in 6006 learning a
variety of algorithms what I want to do
today is spend literally a minute or so
on
administrative details maybe even less
what I'd like to do is to tell you to go
to the website that's listed up there
and read it and you'll get all the
information you need about what this
class is about from a standpoint of
syllabus what's expected of you the
problem set schedule the quiz schedule
and so on and so forth I want to dive
right in and tell you about interesting
things like algorithms and complexity of
algorithms I want to spend some time
giving you an overview of the course
content and then we're going to dive
right in and look at a particular
problem of peak finding both the one
dimensional version and a two
dimensional version and talk about
algorithms to solve the speak finding
problem both varieties of it and you'll
find that there's really a difference
between these various algorithms that
we'll look at in terms of their
complexity and what I mean by that is
you're going to have different runtimes
of these algorithms depending on input
size based on how efficient these
algorithms are and prerequisite for this
class is 604 two and in 604 2 you
learned about asymptotic complexity and
you'll see that in this lecture we'll
analyze relatively simple algorithms
today in terms of their asymptotic
complexity and you'll be able to compare
and say that this algorithm is faster
than this other one assuming that you
have large inputs
because it's hasn't totally less complex
so let's dive right in and talk about
the class so the one sentence summary of
this class is that this is about
efficient procedures for solving
problems on large inputs and when I say
large inputs I mean things like the US
highway system a map of all of the
highways in the United States the human
genome which has a billion letters in
its alphabet a social network
corresponding to Facebook that I guess
has 500 million nodes or so so these are
large inputs now our definition of large
has really changed with the times and so
really the 21st century definition of
large is I guess a trillion right back
when I was your age large was like a
thousand right I guess I'm dating myself
here back when Eric was your age it was
a million right but what's happening I
really the world is moving faster things
are getting bigger we have the
capability of computing on large inputs
but that doesn't mean that efficiency
isn't of paramount concern the fact of
the matter is that you can maybe scan a
billion elements in a matter of seconds
but if you had an algorithm that
required cubic complexity suddenly
you're not talking about 10 raise to 9
you're talking about 10 raise to 27 and
even current computers can't really
handle that kind of those kinds of
numbers so efficiency is a concern and
as inputs get larger it becomes more of
a concern all right so we concern about
efficient procedures for solving
large-scale problems in this class and
we're concerned about scalability
because just as you know 1,000 was a big
number a couple of decades ago and and
now it's it's kind of a small number
it's quite possible that by the time you
guys are professors teaching this class
in some university that a trillion is
going to be a small number and we're
going to be talking about at no 10 raise
to 18 as being something that we're
concerned with from a standpoint of a
common case input for an algorithm so
scalability is important and we want to
be able to track how our algorithms are
going to do as inputs get larger and
larger you're going to learn a bunch of
different data structures we'll call
them classic data structures like binary
search trees hash tables that are called
dictionaries in Python and data
structures such as balanced binary
search trees that are more efficient
than just the regular binary search
trees and these are all data structures
that were invented many decades ago but
they've stood the test of time and they
continue to be useful we're going to
augment these data structures in various
ways to make them more efficient for
certain kinds of problems and while
you're not going to be doing a whole lot
of algorithm design in this class you
will be doing some design and a whole
lot of analysis the class following this
one 604 six design analysis of
algorithms is a class that you should
take if you like this one and you can do
a whole lot more design of
in six oh four six but you will look at
classic data structures and classical
algorithms for these data structures
including things like sorting and
matching and so on and one of the nice
things about this class is that you'll
be doing real implementations of these
data structures and algorithms in Python
and in particular each of the problem
sets in this class are going to have
both a theory part to them and a
programming part to them so hopefully
it'll all tie together the kinds of
things we're going to be talking about
in lectures and recitations are going to
be directly connected to the theory
parts of the problem sets and you'll be
programming the algorithms that we
talked about in lecture or augmenting
them running them figuring out whether
and they work well on large inputs or
not so let me talk a little bit about
the modules in this class and the
problem sets and we hope that these
problem sets are going to be fun for you
and by fun I don't mean easy
I mean challenging and worthwhile so at
the end of it you feel like you've
learned something and you've had some
fun along the way
right so content wise we have eight
modules in the class each of which
roughly speaking has a problem set
associated with it are the first of
these is what we call algorithmic
thinking and with kickstart that one
today I will look at a particular
problem as I mentioned of peak finding
and as part of this you're going to have
a plumb set that's going to go out today
as well
and you
that in this problem said some of these
algorithms I've talked about today will
be coded in Python and given to you a
couple of them are gonna have bugs in
them you have to analyze the complexity
of these algorithms figure out which
ones are correct inefficient and write a
proof for one of them all right so
that's sort of an example problem set
and you can expect that most of the
problem sets are going to follow that
sort of template right so you'll get a
better sense of this in in by the end of
the day today for sure or a concrete
sense of this because we'll be done with
lecture and you'll see your first
problem set you're gonna be doing a
module on sorting in trees sorting you
know about sorting a bunch of numbers
imagine if you had a trillion numbers
and you wanted to sort them what kind of
algorithm could you use for that
trees are a wonderful data structure
there's different varieties the most
common being binary trees and these ways
of doing all sorts of things like
scheduling and sorting using various
kinds of trees including binary trees
and we have a problem set on simulating
a logic network using a particular kind
of sorting algorithm and a data
structure and that is going to be your
second problem set and more quickly
we're going to have modules on hashing
where we do things like genome
comparison in pass terms have you
compared a human genome to a rat genome
and discovered they were pretty similar
99% similar which is kind of amazing but
again these things are so large that you
have to have efficiency in the
comparison methods that you use and
you'll find that if you don't get the
complexity low enough you just won't be
able to complete the your program won't
be able to finish running bitten you
know the time that you're problem set is
due right which is a bit
a problem so so that's something to keep
in mind as you test your code the fact
is that you will get large inputs to run
your code and I you want to keep
complexity in mind as you're coding and
thinking about the the pseudo code if
you will of your algorithm itself
I've people to talk about numerix a lot
of the time you talk about such large
numbers that 32 bits isn't enough um and
or 64 bits isn't enough to represent
these numbers these numbers have
thousands of bits a good example this
RSA encryption that is used in SSL for
example and when you go use HTTPS on
websites RSA is used at the back end and
typically you work with prime numbers
there are thousands of bits long in RSA
so how do you handle that
how does Python handle that how do you
write algorithms that can deal with what
are called infinite precision numbers so
we have a module on numerix in the
middle of the term that talks about that
graphs really fundamental data structure
in all of computer science you might
have heard of the famous Rubik's Cube
assignment from double O six at two by
two by two rubik's cube what's the
minimum number of moves necessary to go
from a given starting configuration to
the final end configuration where all of
the faces each of the faces has uniform
color and that can be posed as a graph
problem I will probably do that one this
term in previous terms we've done other
things like the 15 puzzle and so some of
these are tentative we definitely know
what the first problem set is like but
the rest of them are at this moment
tentative um and to finish up by
shortest paths again in terms past we've
asked you to write code using a
particular algorithm that finds the
shortest path from Caltech to MIT
this time we may do things a little bit
differently we we're thinking maybe
we'll give you a street
Boston and and you know go figure out if
Paul Revere used to shot a spat to get
to where he was going or things like
that we will try and make it fun dynamic
programming is an important algorithm
design technique that's used in many
many problems and it can be used to do a
variety of things including image
compression how do you compress an image
so the number of pixels reduces but it
still looks like the image that you
started out with that had many more
pixels actually could use dynamic
programming for that and finally
advanced topics complexity theory
research in algorithms hopefully by now
by this time in the in the course you
have been sold on algorithms and most if
not all of you would want to pursue a
career in algorithms and we'll give you
a sense of what else is there we're just
scratching the surface in this class and
there's many many classes that you can
possibly take if you want to continue I
in to learn about algorithms or to
pursue a career in algorithms alright so
that's the story of the class of the
synopsis of the class and I encourage
you to go spend a few minutes on the
website in particular please read the
collaboration policy and get a sense of
what is expected of you what the rules
are in terms of doing the problem sets
and the course grading breakdown and the
grading policies are all listed on the
website as well right ok so let's get
started I want to talk about a specific
problem and talk about algorithms for a
specific problem we picked this problem
because it's so easy to understand and
they're fairly straightforward
algorithms that are not particularly
efficient to solve this problem and so
this is a kind of a toy problem but like
a lot of toy problems
it's it's very evocative in that it
points out the issues involved in
designing efficient algorithms so if we
start with a one dimensional version of
what we call peak finding and a peak
finder is something in the one
dimensional case runs on an array of
numbers and I'm just putting symbols for
each of these numbers here and the
numbers are positive negative we'll just
assume they're all positive it doesn't
really matter the algorithms we describe
will work and so we have this one
dimensional array that has nine
different positions and a through I are
numbers and we want to find a peak and
so we have to define what we mean by a
peak and so in particular as an example
position two is a peak if and only if B
greater than or equal to a and B greater
than or equal to C so it's really a very
local property corresponding to a peak
in the one dimensional case it's trivial
look to your left look to your right if
your equal or greater than both of the
elements that you see on the left and
the right
you're a peak okay and in the case of
the edges you only have to look to one
side so position 9 is a peak if I
greater than equal to H so you just have
to look to your left there because
you're all the way on the right-hand
side
all right so so that's it and the
statement of the problem
the one dimensional version is find the
peak if it exists all right that's all
there is to it
I'm gonna give you a straightforward
algorithm and then you'll see if you can
improve it all right you can imagine
that the straightforward algorithm is
something that just we know walks across
the array but we need that as a starting
point for building something more
sophisticated so let's say we start from
left and all we have is one traversal
really so let's say we have 1 2 and then
we have n over 2 over here corresponding
to the middle of this n element array
and then we have n minus 1 and n what
I'm interested in doing is not only
coming up with a straightforward
algorithm but also precisely
characterizing what its complexity is in
relation to M which is the number of
inputs yeah question
that's exactly right
I was going to get to that so if you
look at the definition of the peak then
what I have here is a greater than or
equal to okay and so there's a that's a
great question that was asked why is
there if it exists in this problem now
in the case where I have greater than or
equal to then I this is a homework
question for for you and for the rest of
you argue that any array will always
have a peak okay now if you didn't have
the greater than or equal to and you had
a greater than then can you make that
argument no you can right so a great
question in this case it's just the
question is you would want to modify
this problem statement to find a peak
but if I if I had a different definition
of a peak and this is part of
algorithmic thinking you want to be able
to create algorithms that are general so
if the problem definition changes on you
you still have a starting point to go
attack the second version of the problem
okay
so you could eliminate this in the case
of the greater than or equal to
definition the if it exists because the
peak will always exist but you probably
want to argue that when you want to show
the correctness of your algorithm and if
in fact you had a different definition
well you would have to create a
algorithm that tells you for sure that a
peak doesn't exist or find a peak if it
exists right so that's really the
general case many a time it's possible
that you're you're asked to do something
and you can't actually give an answer to
the to the to the question or find
something that satisfies all the
constraints required and in that case
you want to be able to put up your hand
and say you know what
I searched long and hard I searched
exhaustively here's my argument that I
searched exhaustively and I couldn't
find it right if you do
that you get to keep your job right
otherwise there's there's always the the
case that you didn't search hard enough
so it's nice to have that argument all
right great thanks for the question
now feel free to interrupt raise your
hand and and I'm watching you guys and
I'm happy to answer questions at any
time so let's talk about the
straightforward algorithm the
straightforward algorithm is something
that starts from the left and just walks
across and you might have something that
looks like that all right by that by
this I mean the numbers are increasing
as you start from the left the peak is
somewhere in the middle and then things
start decreasing right so I'm in this
case you know this might be the peak it
you also may have a situation where the
peak is all the way on the right you'll
start it from the left and it's one two
three four five six literally in terms
of the numbers and you're going to look
at n elements going all the way to the
right in in order to find the peak so in
the case of the middle you'd look at n
over two elements if it was right in the
middle and the complexity worst case
complexity is what we call theta N and
it's theta n because in the worst case
you may have to look at all n elements
and that would be the case where you
started from the left and you had to go
all the way to the right now remember
theta M is essentially something that
says of the order of M so it gives you
both the lower bound and an upper bound
Big O of N is just the upper bound and
what we're saying here is we're saying
this algorithm that starts from the left
is going to essentially require in the
worst case something that's a constant
times a
okay and you know that constant could be
could be one eye you could certainly set
things up that way or if you had a
different kind of algorithm maybe you
could work on the on the on the constant
but bottom line we are only concerned at
this moment about asymptotic complexity
and the asymptotic complexity of this
algorithm is linear all right that makes
sense okay so someone help me do better
how can we do better how can we lower
the asymptotic complexity of a one
dimensional peak finder anybody want to
take a stab at that yeah back there
excellent excellent that's exactly right
so you can you can do something
different which is essentially try and
break up this problem use a divide and
conquer strategy and recursively break
up this one-dimensional array into
smaller arrays and and try and get this
complexity down yeah
nobody not if it's fine a peak if it
exists and in this case it's fine Oh P
because of the definition we don't
really need this as it was discussed all
right okay so so that was a great answer
and you know this class after a while
it's gonna get boring right every class
gets boring so if you you know try and
break the monotony here a bit and so and
the other thing that we realized was
that these seats you're sitting on this
is a nice classroom but the seats you're
sitting on are kind of hard right so
what Eric and I did was we decided we'll
help you guys out especially the ones
who are Minh tracting with us and we
have these cushions that are six double
O six cushions and you know that's a two
by two by two Rubik's Cube here and
since you answered the first question
you get a cushion this is kind of like a
frisbee but not really yeah so I'm not
sure I'm not sure I'm gonna get it to
you but I don't thing I want to say is
this is not a baseball game right where
you just grab the balls that come by
this is meant for him my friend and
there in the red shirt so here you go ah
too bad
alright it is soft so you know it won't
it won't hurt you if it hits you alright
so if you got a bunch of these and I
raise your hands you know when I ask
there's going to be yeah I think there's
some trivial questions that we're going
to ask just to make sure you wait so an
answer to that doesn't get you a cushion
but you know an answer like what's the
name Jase answer like Jase just gave is
a that's a good answer to non-trivial
shouldn't that gets you a cushion okay
all right great so let's put up Jace's
algorithm up here I'm gonna write it out
for the 1d version so what we have here
is a recursive algorithm so the picture
you want to keep in your head is this
picture that I've put up there and this
is a divide-and-conquer algorithm you're
gonna see this over and over this
paradigm over and over in six double oh
six we're gonna look at the N over two
position and we're going to look to the
left and we're gonna look to the right
and we're gonna do that in sequence so
if a and over two is less than a and
over two minus one then only look at
left half one through n over two minus
one to look for pink or a peak all right
so that's step one and you're not gonna
be on the right-hand side or the left
hand side doesn't really matter I chose
to do the left-hand side first the left
half and so what I've done is through
that one step if in fact you have that
condition a and over two is less than a
number two - one then you moved your
left and you work on one half of the
problem but if that's not the case then
if and over and over two is less than a
over and over n by 2 plus 1 then only
look at n over 2 plus 1 through n for a
peak so I haven't bothered writing out
all the words they're exactly the same
as the left-hand side you just look to
the right-hand side
otherwise if both of these conditions
don't fire you're actually done ok
that's actually the best case in terms
of finishing early at least in this
recursive step because now the n over 2
position is a peak because what you
found is that the in over 2 position is
greater than or equal to both of its
adjacent positions and that's exactly
the definition of a peak so you're done
okay so all of this is good you want to
write an argument that this algorithm is
correct and I'm not going to bother with
that I just waved my hands a bit and you
all nodded so we're done with that but
the point being you will see I in your
problem set a precise argument for a
more complicated algorithm the 2d
version of this and that should be a
template for you to go write a proof or
an argument a formal argument that a
particular algorithm is correct that it
does what it claims to do and in this
case it's to three lines of of careful
reasoning that essentially say given the
definition of the peak that this is
going to find a peak in the array that
you're given all right so we all believe
that this algorithm is correct
let's talk now about the complexity of
this algorithm because the whole point
of this algorithm was because we didn't
like this data and complexity
corresponding to the straightforward
algorithm so I'd like to do better so
what I'd like to do is ask one of you to
give me a recurrence relation of the
kind you know T of n equals blah blah
blah that would correspond to this
recursive algorithm this divide and
conquer algorithm and then using that
I'd like to get to the actual complexity
in terms of what the theta of complexity
corresponds to yeah back there
great exactly right that's exactly right
so if you look at this algorithm and you
you say from a computation standpoint
can I write an equation corresponding to
the execution of this algorithm and you
say T of n is the work that this
algorithm does on as input of size n
okay
then I can write this equation and this
theta one corresponds to the two
comparisons that you do looking at
potentially the two comparisons that you
do looking at the left hand side and the
right hand side so that's the two is a
constant so that's why we put theta 1
all right so you get a cushion to watch
out guys whoa Oh actually that one's a
bad veers left Erik yours left so if you
take this and you start expanding it
eventually you're going to get to the
base case which is T of 1 is Theta 1
right because you have a 1 element array
you just for that array is just gonna
return that as a peak and so if you do
that and you expand it all the way out
but then you can write T of N equals
theta 1 plus theta 1 and you're going to
do this log to the base 2 of n times and
adding these all up gives you a
complexity theta log 2 of n right so now
you compare this with that and there's
really a huge difference there's an
exponential difference if you coded up
this algorithm in Python
and I did both these algorithms for the
1d version and if you run it on n being
10 million or so then this algorithm
takes 13 seconds okay the or theta n
algorithm takes 13 seconds and this one
takes point zero zero one seconds okay
huge difference so there is a big
difference between theta N and theta log
N and it's literally the difference
between 2 raised to n and n it makes
sense to try and reduce complexity as
you can see especially if you're talking
about large inputs right and you'll see
that more clearly as we go to a 2d
version of this problem alright so you
can't really do better for the 1d the 1d
is a straight forward problem it gets a
little more interesting the problems get
a little excuse me the algorithms get a
little more sophisticated when we look
at a 2d version of peak finding so let's
talk about the 2d version so as you can
imagine in the 2d version you have a
matrix or a two-dimensional array and
we'll say this thing has n rows and M
columns and now we have to define what a
peak is and it's a hill it's the obvious
definition of a peak so if you had a in
here C B D e then as you can guess a is
a 2d peak if and only if a greater than
or equal to B a greater than or equal to
D C and E all right so it's a little
hill up there alright and again I've
used the greater than or equal to here
so that's similar to the 1d and in the
case that you'll always find a peak in
any 2d matrix now again I'll give you
the straightforward algorithm alright
and we'll call it the greedy ascent
algorithm and the greedy ascent
algorithm essentially picks the
direction and you know tries to follow
that direction in order to find the peak
so for example if I had this particular
matrix 14 13 12 15 9 then what might
happen is if I started at some arbitrary
midpoint so the greedy ascent algorithm
has to make choices as to where to start
just like we had different cases here
you have to make a choice as to where to
start you might want to start in the
middle and you might want to work your
way left first or you can all you just
keep going left
like I'll keep going right and if you
hit an edge you go down so you make some
choices as to what the default traversal
directions are and so if you say you
want to start with 12 you're going to go
look for something to your left and if
it's greater then you're going to follow
that direction if it's not if it's less
then you're going to go to in the in the
other direction in this case for example
so in this case you'll you'll go 12 13
14 15 16 17 19 and 20 and you'd find
you'd find this peak now I haven't given
you those specific details of a greedy
ascent algorithm but I think um if you
look at the worst-case possibilities
here with respect to a given matrix and
for any given starting point and for any
given strategy in terms of choosing left
first versus right first or down first
versus up first you will have a
situation where I'm just like we had in
the 1d case you may end up touching a
large fraction of the elements in this
2d array okay so in this case we ended
up you know touching a bunch of
different elements and it's quite
possible that um you you could end up
touching starting from the midpoint you
could end up touching half the elements
and in some cases touching all of the
elements so um if you do a worst case
analysis of this algorithm a particular
algorithm with particular choices in
terms of the starting point and the
direction of search a greedy ascent
algorithm would have theta n m
complexity alright and in the case where
N equals M or M equals and you'd have
theta N squared complexity okay I won't
spend very much time on this because I
want to talk to you about the divide and
conquer versions of this algorithm for
the 2d peak but hopefully you're all
with me with respect to what the worst
case complexity is all right people buy
that yeah question back there
so if there are specific greedy ascent
algorithms and specific matrices where
if I give you the code for the algorithm
and I give you a specific matrix that I
could make you touch all of these
elements that's correct so if you're
talking about worst case that's you're
being very paranoid when you talk about
worst case complexity and so I'm hand
waving a bit here simply because I
haven't given you the specifics of the
algorithm yet right this is really a on
a set of algorithms because I haven't
given you the code I haven't told you
where it starts and which direction it
goes but you go do that
fix it and you know I would be the
person who tries to find the worst case
complexity certainly it's very easy to
get to theta n m in terms of having some
constant multiplying n times M but you
can definitely get to that constant
being very close to one okay if not one
all right so let's talk about divide and
conquer I'm let's say that I did
something like this where I just tried
to jam the binary search algorithm I
into the 2d version all right
so what I'm going to do is I'm going to
pick the middle column J equals M over 2
and I'm gonna find a 1d peak using
whatever algorithm I want and I'll
probably end up using the more efficient
algorithm the binary search version
that's gone all the way to the left of
the board there and let's say I find a
binary peak at I J because I've picked a
column and I'm just finding a 1d peak so
this is J equals M over 2 that's I now I
use I J in particular Road I as a start
to find a 1d peak on row I and I stand
up here I'm really happy okay because I
say wow I picked a middle column I found
a 1d peak that is Theta and complexity
to find a 1d peak as we argued and once
I'd let theta M oh I'm sorry you're
right the log n complexity that's what
this was very we have that here yeah log
n complexity thanks Eric and and then
once I do that I can find a 1d peak on
row I I in this case the row I would be
a m wide so it'd be log m complexity if
N equals M then I have a couple of steps
of log N and I'm done right
am I done no can someone tell someone
tell me why I'm not done precisely yep
that's exactly correct so this algorithm
is incorrect okay it doesn't work it's
efficient but incorrect okay it's you
want to be correct you know being
correct and inefficient is is definitely
better than being inefficient I'm sorry
being incorrect and efficient so this is
an efficient algorithm in the sense that
it will only take log n time but it
doesn't work and I'll I'll give you a
simple example here where it doesn't
work the problem is a 2d peak may not
exist on row I and here's an example of
that actually this is a this is exactly
the example of that let's say that I
started with with this row since it's
I'm starting with the middle row and I
could start with this one or that one
let's say I started with with that one I
end up finding a peak and if this were
10 up here
I choose 12 as a peak and it's quite
possible that I've returned 12 as a peak
even though 19 is bigger because 12 is a
peak given 10 and 11 up here and then
when I choose this particular row and I
find a peak on this row it would be 14
that is a 1d peak on this row but 14 is
not a 2d peak
okay so this particular example 14 would
return 14 and 14 is not a2dp
all right you can collect your cushion
after the class so not so good look like
an efficient algorithm but doesn't work
all right so
how can we get to something that
actually works so the last algorithm
that I'm going to show you and you'll
see of four different algorithms in your
problem set that you'll have to analyze
the complexity for and decide if they're
efficient and if they're correct but
here's a recursive version that is
better than in terms of complexity then
the greedy ascent algorithm and this one
works so what I'm going to do is pick a
middle column J equals M over 2 as
before I'm gonna find the global maximum
on column J and that's going to be at IJ
I'm going to compare I comma J minus 1 I
comma J and I J plus 1 which means that
once I've found the maximum in this row
all I'm going to I'm going to look to
the left and the right and compare I'm
gonna pick the left columns if I comma J
minus 1 is greater than I comma J and
similarly for the right and if in fact I
I either of these two conditions don't
fire that and what I have is I comma J
is greater than or equal to I comma J
minus 1 and I comma J plus 1 then I'm
done just like I had for the 1d version
if I comma J is greater than or equal to
I comma J minus 1
and I comma J plus 1 that implies IJ is
a 2d peak ok and the reason that's the
case is because I comma J was the
maximum element in that column so you
know that you've compared it to all of
the adjacent elements looking up and
looking down that's the maximum element
now you've looked at the left in the
right and in fact it's greater than or
equal to the elements on the left and
the right and so therefore it's a 2d
peak okay so in this case when you pick
the left are the right columns you'll
pick one of them you're going to solve
the new problem with half the number of
columns all right and again you have to
go through an analysis or an argument to
make sure that this algorithm is correct
but it's intuitively correct simply
because it matches the 1d version much
more closely and you also have your
condition where you break away right
here where you have a 2d peak just like
the 1d version and what you've done is
break this matrix up into half the size
and that's essentially why this
algorithm works when you have a single
column coin the global maximum and
you're done
all right so that's the the base case so
let me end with just writing out what
the recurrence relation for the
complexity of this is and argue what the
overall complexity of this algorithm is
and then I'll give you the bad news
all right so overall what you have is
you have something like T of n M equals
T of M M over 2 plus theta M why is that
well n is the number of rows M is the
number of columns in one case you will
be breaking things down into half the
number of columns which is M over 2 and
in order to find the global maximum
you'll be doing theta and work because
you're finding the global maximum right
you just have to scan it there's I
that's the way that's what it's going to
take and so if you do that and you go
running through you and you know that T
of N 1 is Theta n which is this last
part over here that's your base case you
get T of n M is Theta of F n added to
theta of n log of M times log 2 of M
times which is Theta of n log 2 of M all
right so you're not done with deke
finding what you'll see is at for
algorithms coded in Python I'm not going
to give away what those algorithms are
but you'll have to recognize them you
will have seen versions of those
algorithms already in lecture and your
job is going to be to analyze the
algorithms as I said before prove that
one of them is correct and find counter
examples for the ones that aren't
correct the course staff will stick
around here to answer questions
logistical questions or questions about
lecture and I owe that gentleman the
cushion